(♪♪)
>> Tom: This week on
"Marketplace."
>> Oh, boy, came in for a $20
oil change.
>> You're about to see a fast
lube franchise pull a fast
one.
>> If you can, try and get
your transmission fluid
changed.
>> Is it necessary?
>> No, I just did a
transmission service.
>> Tom: That's what I thought.
We go up on the hoist
to show you what's really going
down at these oil change shops.
>> Let me tell you a little
bit about fraud.
>> Tom: Insiders share the
secrets of shaking you down.
>> I've never worked for a
more shady, crooked, deceitful
company.
>> Tom: And we track down the
man behind all this greasy
business.
>> That's him right by the door.
Do you want to just go get
him, Tom?
>> Yeah.
>> Just go, just go.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: We're heading to this
Economy Lube in Guelph,
Ontario.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: It's part of a chain of
oil change garages that
promises fast and affordable
service.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Ten minutes, 20 bucks,
and you're done, according to
their ad.
(♪♪)
♪ Just $19.99, at Economy Lube♪
>> Tom: Catchy but maybe not
that simple.
>> Hi there.
>> Need an oil change?
>> Yes, please.
>> Tom: Who hasn't worried
about turning over their car
to some gearhead and getting
back a big bill.
And a lot of gobbledygook.
>> Tom: We've been hearing
there's reason to worry at
Economy Lube.
That's why we're putting it to
the test.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Right off the bat,
they're upselling that $20 oil
change.
>> Tom: Recommending a more
expensive package than
advertised but does it get any
worse than that?
These guys say you can bet on
it.
>> I have never worked for a
company like Economy Lube, for
a more shady, crooked,
deceitful company.
>> Tom: They're insiders,
former employees of Economy
Lube, who still have ties to
the industry, and don't want
to be identified.
>> I totally rip people off
and I did that for a number of
years for the dollar and the
money.
>> Tom: Their years of ripping
people off at Economy Lube
ended in a bitter fight over
wages.
You had issues, you went to
the labour department and
argued over money, that sort
of thing.
>> Everything we're saying
is a hundred percent true.
There would be many more
people besides us that would
be, you know, willing to say
so as well.
>> Tom: They have no axe to
grind, they say, just a
conscience to clear.
>> This is our chance to right
our wrongs and bring awareness
to what's going on.
>> Tom: So they're blowing the
whistle on a company that they
say tops you up and rips you
off, all because the boss wants
it that way.
>> I couldn't remember
questioning him about the
practises as far as sales go,
and his exact words were go
save the whales somewhere
else, and he told me it was an
upsell world.
>> Tom: But we're not just
talking their word for it.
We've assembled a team of
testers to help us see for
ourselves.
All of them work for CBC.
Anu, Steve, and Ryan.
Each driving a car with one
thing in common: They all need
an oil change, and nothing
else.
They will be heading to that
same Economy Lube in Guelph.
And what's about to happen has
lessons for us all.
Our home base for the day is
Conestoga college.
They train a lot of future
mechanics here, and they have
agreed to let us use their
massive garage.
>> Tom: Morning everybody.
Nice to see you.
So the plan as you know is
we're going to head down to
Economy Lube and you're going
to just be customers.
>> Tom: Helping us with our
test is expert Mark
Sach-Anderson.
>> They shouldn't be offering
you anymore than just the oil
change you're going in for.
Everything else is fine on the
car so it should be a nice
simple, easy, in, oil change,
and out.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Mark has been in the
industry for more than 20
years.
He began as an oil change
technician himself.
Became a mechanic and worked
his way up the ranks.
He now runs this garage in
Toronto's west end.
>> There are a lot of good oil
change facilities.
Unfortunately, there's a few
bad ones, and it spoils it for
everybody.
>> Tom: The oil change industry
knows it has a bad reputation.
>> It seems like mechanics are
always out to get you.
>> Tom: Jiffy Lube, for
instance, plays off customer
worries in this ad.
>> But at Jiffy Lube, we don't
fix vehicles, we help keep them
running right to help you leave
repair shop worries behind.
>> Tom: So if the industry
knows we're suspicious, can we
really finally leave worries
behind?
If only.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: To do our test properly,
it's important to establish a
base line.
So Mark spends days going over
test vehicles.
He knows the kind of
additional services routinely
offered by places like Economy
Lube, such as fluid and filter
changes, and he wants to beat
them to the punch.
He makes sure none of our cars
need anything more than an oil
change.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Our hidden camera
specialist. Rob, is hard at
work making sure we've got all
the angles covered when it
comes to capturing our test.
>> Tom: Cool.
And where is that going to go?
>> Under the hood of the
Uplander.
>> So the guy working under
the hood, we'll be able to
see his hands working.
>> We'll be able to see his
hands reaching to all the
different -- stick and engine
coolant.
>> Cool.
>> Tom: So wondering what to
expect?
Back at Conestoga college, our
first tester, Anu, is wired up
and ready to go to see if what
we're hearing about Economy
Lube holds true.
>> I'll open the door for you.
>> Okay, thank you.
>> All right, good luck.
>> Thanks, Tom.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: The Economy Lube shop
is less than five minutes down
the road from our home base.
As Anu approaches, our
surveillance camera across the
street picks her up and
follows her in.
Our insiders say at Economy
Lube, the technicians count on
your ignorance, even though
they might not know much more
about your car than you do.
>> When I started, I'd never
worked on vehicles, never
popped a drain plug, never did
an oil change, no experience.
>> Tom: How about you?
>> I had experience from a
previous oil change places but
I worked with people who
didn't know anything about
cars at all.
>> Tom: They soon learn the
way things work at Economy
Lube.
Who trained you?
>> Actually, the owner of the
company Steve Moxey.
>> Tom: And what did he teach
you?
>> How to sell all the
different services, upselling.
>> Tom: What did that mean at
Economy Lube?
>> To sell as many services
and get as big of a bill as
you possibly could on every
single vehicle.
>> Because he didn't care if
you did the work, he cared if
you got the money.
>> Tom: And were these services
that were needed?
>> Uh, majority of the time, no.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: You can find a photo
of owner Steve Moxey right on
the door as you enter Economy
Lube.
Moxey has built a chain of 12
shops throughout southwestern
Ontario.
And according to our insiders,
he's done it through
dishonesty.
>> Just need an oil change?
>> Yeah.
>> Tom: Inside the shop, our
first tester is hearing she
needs a lot more than a simple
oil change.
>> Couldn't have smelled burnt
and it certainly wasn't brown
because I changed it.
>> Tom: And later, a former
fraud cop weighs in on our
findings.
>> I have told people all my
life that fraud is theft with
a smile.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: We're inside a quick
oil change shop called Economy
Lube.
Like all these types of shops,
they say they specialize in
fast work at affordable
prices.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Insiders tell us they
do a lot more than that.
Like sell you services you
don't need.
>> Engine flush.
>> Tom: Charge whatever they
can get and often not even do
the work.
>> Gimme some examples of
where you might do something
that wasn't really the real
thing?
>> One of the easiest things
to sell is power steering
fluid.
Take a sample and you can tell
a person that it should be
clear, you could tell a person
that it should be red, or you
could just go by the smell of
the fluid, smell this, the
fluid is very burnt.
There's a very easy sale.
>> Tom: With each lie they
tell, technicians earn money.
>> They were on a commission
system as far as what you
sold, so if I sold, say, a
coolant flush for $59, I would
get $2, if I sold it for 69
bucks, I get three bucks.
>> Tom: The bigger the lie,
the more money.
That's why they do so much
lying.
How often would those things
happen where you do a trick
every day.
>> Every day.
>> Multiple times a day.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: So will it happen to
our first tester?
Anu's car has been up on the
hoist for a few short minutes.
When she gets the prognosis.
>> Most of your stuff is in
good shape.
>> Okay.
>> Tom: The car needs more
than an oil change, he says,
it needs a brake flush and
power steering flush, two
procedures that involve time
and the complete replacement
of fluids.
But why?
>> Tom: Burning fluid.
Just like our insiders talked
about.
>> Tom: Remember, our expert
mechanic has checked out this
car and assures us it needs no
such work.
But in keeping with our test,
we give the go-ahead.
>> Tom: In reality it takes
them half that time.
In less than eight minutes, we
get the bill.
>> Tom: More than 200 bucks?
How did that happen?
>> Tom: We push for a better
explanation and get a better
deal in the process.
>> Tom: Our tester pays up.
And heads back to home base.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: So how did it go?
>> You know what?
They were really nice.
>> Tom: Can we see the bill?
>> Yeah, sure.
>> Tom: Nice is nice but our
expert mechanic Mark Sach-
Anderson says there's nothing
nice about that final bill.
In your view, the power
steering flush and brake fluid
flush were not needed?
>> No.
The fluids were up.
All of this was checked when I
had it at my shop.
Not three days ago.
>> Tom: Not only was the work
not needed, Mark suspects it
wasn't done.
Given how little time it took.
Mark shows us the four points
behind the wheels where it
would be clear if a brake
flush had been carried out.
>> There's so much rust on the
back of this bleeder or on the
bleeder here, and around the
seal, it hasn't been opened.
That tells me that the system's
not flushed.
>> Tom: All right, Mark,
let's go to the videotape, shall
we, and see what they did.
Our videotape confirms Mark's
suspicions.
>> Tightening the filter,
wiping off any oil.
>> Tom: That $90 brake flush
never happened.
>> Tom: Still nothing on the
brakes.
>> Nothing on the brakes.
>> Tom: Same for the power
steering flush.
Our hidden hood cam shows no
evidence it was performed.
>> But reality is you were
charged for it.
And it wasn't done.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Time for test number
two.
Our man Ryan is pulling up for
his oil change.
And who knows what else.
>> I'm here for the engine oil
change.
>> Yeah, no problem.
>> Tom: Just like last time,
that $20 oil change they
advertise becomes 29.
>> Tom: And just like last
time, it doesn't end there.
After a quick inspection, they
tell Ryan he needs more than
his oil change.
>> Tom: The brakes, again,
and the transmission?
Our expert, Mark, just did that
a few days ago.
A messy and lengthy procedure
we captured on camera.
Our insiders tell us this kind
of deception can really add
up.
>> As much as you didn't want
to do it but at the end of the
week when you get a thousand
dollar paycheque take home.
>> The money was just too
good.
With a high school education,
where are you going to make
between 65 and $100,000
a year?
>> Tom: Now Ryan is handing over
his money at Economy Lube.
After just ten minutes of work
on his car.
>> Tom: On his way with some
air fresheners and a bill that
stinks.
>> Thank you, bye.
>> Tom: Back at home base, we
have a look.
How was it?
>> It was, yeah, pricey.
>> Tom: We'll see what you
came up with.
218.
>> Yeah.
>> Tom: You asked for a $20
oil change?
>> Right, yeah, I did.
>> Tom: $218, Ryan's bill is
ten times when he went in for,
including 80 bucks for the
transmission.
Was that needed?
>> No.
I just, just did a transmission
service on this.
>> Tom: That's what I thought.
We check our hidden camera
tape to see how they sell that
one.
>> Tom: There's that burning
fluid line again.
Our expert is appalled.
>> It did not smelled burned
because it was all fresh fluid.
But I mean there's absolutely
no way that this service was
needed.
Good sales pitch.
But it's completely false.
It's almost like a script,
it's almost identical to the
service that we had on car
number one, the same it's
dirty, it smells.
>> Tom: So how about that
expensive brake flush?
They didn't actually do it the
first time they charged for
it, how about this time?
Mark checks and says no.
They didn't do a flush?
>> They couldn't have done a
flush.
>> Tom: Two for two.
Two flushes paid for that
didn't happen.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Our third and final
tester Steve pulls in towards
the end of the day to get
his oil changed.
But will the upsell happen
again?
The answer comes minutes
later.
>> Tom: The technician promises
to flush out the entire engine
block and the radiator, and of
course, the braking system.
Back at home base...
>> Tom: How was it?
>> That was the most expensive
$19.99 I ever spent.
>> Tom: Really?
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Tom: Let's see.
251 bucks?
Good Lord, that's the highest
of the day.
What was the sales pressure
like on you?
>> They start off sounding
like you can choose, but they
sort of -- they gradually move
it into you really should get
it, we can do it for you right
now.
>> Tom: But did they do it?
Mark is interested in the full
system coolant flush they
charged for.
He says this car uses a
special coolant called
dex-cool which is orange.
He shows us what's in the
resevoir.
>> Look at that, bright green.
>> Tom: Bright green.
That's not the proper coolant?
>> That's not the proper
coolant for this vehicle.
>> Tom: Is what's in there in
here?
>> We don't know that.
>> Tom: Mark wants to take a
sample from the radiator.
He says if an actual flush was
done, the fluid coming out
will also be green.
>> That looks orange to me.
Oh, yeah.
Look at that.
Okay.
So that's coming out of the
radiator.
>> Tom: Right.
>> That is what is throughout
the system.
What we've seen changed here
is the stuff in the resevoir
and it's been changed with the
wrong stuff.
>> Tom: And what does that
mean for the vehicle?
>> It can cause damage to the
sensors, it can cause damage
and premature wear inside the
engine.
We should really be pulling
that stuff out of the resevoir
before it causes problems.
>> Tom: So not only was the
coolant publish not needed, it
was not done right, causing
cross contamination which
means we have to fix it.
And yet we paid $250.
What do you think about what
they've done?
>> Certainly not right.
Certainly gives us in the
industry a bad name.
>> And it's certainly time to
get some answers.
>> Tom: Oh.
>> What?
>> Tom: He's coming.
So after the break, we show up
at Economy Lube's warehouse
uninvited.
Mr. Moxey, Tom Harrington from
"Marketplace."
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Our investigation into
oil change shops run by
Economy Lube takes us to a
former investigator himself.
>> Let me tell you a little
bit about fraud.
>> Tom: Mark Simchison used to
lead the major fraud division
of the Hamilton police.
at Economy Lube. we were sold
>> Tom: And what our expert
mechanic discovered.
>> It hasn't been opened.
That tells me that the
system's not flushed.
>> Tom: So what's his verdict?
>> I have told people all my
life that fraud is theft with
a smile.
>> Tom: Putting it right out
there, you're saying what
they're doing is fraud?
>> If they are charging for,
and accepting, money for and
receiving money for services
that they did not perform that
you paid for in all honesty,
that's fraud.
>> Tom: And that's exactly
what we found.
Time to take our evidence to
the top.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: We're as close to the
lot as we can possibly be so
we can see the door.
We're outside Economy Lube
warehouse in Cambridge,
Ontario.
>> He's in the car sitting.
>> Tom: Is he really?
>> Yeah.
>> Tom: Looking for some
answers.
Okay, he's gone in.
We've already made repeated
requests for an on-camera
interview with president and
founder Steve Moxey.
He's now inside.
He backed in with his Range
Rover inside that closed door
garage door.
Given him weeks to think about
it.
>> So if he sees the camera,
I don't think he'll come to
the door.
>> Tom: Right.
More details when requested.
>> I don't know exactly how we
should proceed because we're
across the parking lot right
now.
-- But Moxey still won't come
on camera.
>> Tom: Oh.
>> What?
>> Tom: He's coming.
>> Do you want to go get him,
Tom?
>> Tom: Yeah, why don't we
try now.
So when we spot the man who
greases the wheels at Economy
Lube...
>> Okay here he comes, he's out.
Just go.
>> Tom: We decide to roll.
Mr. Moxey.
But Steve Moxey --
Tom Harrington from
"Marketplace."
-- doesn't want to talk about
why his company is ripping
people off.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: A few days later, we
reach Moxey by phone and
he denies any wrongdoing.
>> I have a real hard time
believing that you took three
cars in and not one of those
cars actually had the service
done because I'm in stores
every day.
You know, I could be wrong,
you know, it's a hundred
employees, anything's
possible.
If it's in fact the case, I
agree with anybody that that
is fraudulent.
>> Tom: We contact those
Economy Lube employees caught
by our hidden cameras.
This one denies working on any
of our test cars.
>> There you go, sir.
>> Tom: But the other fesses
up.
>> I'm not proud of it, but
that's how we were taught to
do stuff.
In that company, you are
forced to rip people off
basically because all the
owner's looking for is money.
If he's not making money, then
you're no use to him.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: As for lessons learned
in all this.
Here's a few tips from our
"Marketplace" survival guide
the next time you need an oil
change.
Familiarize yourself with the
service schedule recommended
by your car's manufacturer.
They built your car, and
probably know best when it
needs maintenance.
Quick oil change shops are
fine for a quick oil change.
For anything bigger or
unexpected, stick with a
mechanic you know you can
trust.
And finally, be on your toes
and know an upsell is coming.
That way you won't be caught
offguard by any greasy
business.
(♪♪)